The ATP binding cassette (ABC) transporter protein Yor1p was identified on
the basis of its ability to elevate oligomycin resistance when it was
overproduced from a high-copy-number plasmid. Analysis of the predicted
amino acid sequence of Yor1p indicated that this protein was a new member
of a subfamily of ABC transporter proteins defined by the multidrug
resistance protein (MRP). In this work, Yor1p is demonstrated to localize
to the Saccharomyces cerevisiae plasma membrane by both indirect
immunofluorescence and biochemical fractionation studies. Several
mutations were generated in the amino-terminal nucleotide binding domain
(NBD1) of Yor1p to test if the high degree of sequence conservation in
this region of the protein was important for function. Deletion of a
phenylalanine residue at Yor1p position 670 led to a mutant protein that
appeared to be retained in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and that was
unstable. As shown by others, deletion of the analogous residue from a
second mammalian MRP family member, the cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator (CFTR), also led to retention of this normally
plasma membrane-localized protein in the ER. Changes in the spacing
between or the sequences flanking functional motifs of Yor1p NBD1 led to
defective trafficking or decreased activity of the mutant proteins.
Analyses of the degradation of wild-type and DeltaF670 Yor1p indicated
that the half-life of DeltaF670 Yor1p was dramatically shortened. While
the vacuole was the primary site for turnover of wild-type Yor1p,
degradation of DeltaF670 Yor1p was found to be more complex with both
proteasomal and vacuolar contributions.