The removal of oxidative damage from Saccharomyces cerevisiae DNA is
thought to be conducted primarily through the base excision repair
pathway. The Escherichia coli endonuclease III homologs Ntg1p and Ntg2p
are S. cerevisiae N-glycosylase-associated apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP)
lyases that recognize a wide variety of damaged pyrimidines (H. J. You, R.
L. Swanson, and P. W. Doetsch, Biochemistry 37:6033-6040, 1998). The
biological relevance of the N-glycosylase-associated AP lyase activity in
the repair of abasic sites is not well understood, and the majority of AP
sites in vivo are thought to be processed by Apn1p, the major AP
endonuclease in yeast. We have found that yeast cells simultaneously
lacking Ntg1p, Ntg2p, and Apn1p are hyperrecombinogenic (hyper-rec) and
exhibit a mutator phenotype but are not sensitive to the oxidizing agents
H2O2 and menadione. The additional disruption of the RAD52 gene in the
ntg1 ntg2 apn1 triple mutant confers a high degree of sensitivity to these
agents. The hyper-rec and mutator phenotypes of the ntg1 ntg2 apn1 triple
mutant are further enhanced by the elimination of the nucleotide excision
repair pathway. In addition, removal of either the lesion bypass
(Rev3p-dependent) or recombination (Rad52p-dependent) pathway specifically
enhances the hyper-rec or mutator phenotype, respectively. These data
suggest that multiple pathways with overlapping specificities are involved
in the removal of, or tolerance to, spontaneous DNA damage in S.
cerevisiae. In addition, the fact that these responses to induced and
spontaneous damage depend upon the simultaneous loss of Ntg1p, Ntg2p, and
Apn1p suggests a physiological role for the AP lyase activity of Ntg1p and
Ntg2p in vivo.