Cholecystokinin (CCK) is a regulatory peptide that is primarily expressed
in two adult cell types: endocrine cells of the intestine and neurons of
the central nervous system. To determine the ontogeny of CCK expression
during intestinal organogenesis, we created a mouse strain in which the
CCK gene was replaced by a lacZ reporter cassette using homologous
recombination in embryonic stem cells. Initially, CCK expression in the
developing intestine was limited to the myenteric plexus of the enteric
nervous system. This expression pattern was widespread, extending from the
proximal stomach into the colon, yet transient, being detected soon after
gut tube closure [embryonic day 10.5 (E10.5)] through E15.5. Since enteric
neurons are derived from the neural crest, we examined earlier (E8.5-9.5)
embryos and concluded that lacZ was expressed in subpopulations of neural
tube and neural crest cells. Endocrine cell expression in the intestinal
epithelium occurred later, beginning at E15.5 as enteric neuronal
expression was dwindling. This expression persisted to yield the adult
pattern of scattered single endocrine cells in the upper small intestine.
The data show that CCK is a very early marker of both neuronal and
endocrine cell lineages in the developing gastrointestinal tract.
Furthermore, reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
analysis showed that CCK receptor transcripts were detected in embryos as
early as E10.5, suggesting that CCK signaling is established early in
mouse development. Dev Dyn 1999;216:190-200.