Influence of nucleotide excision repair and of dose on the types of vermilion
mutations induced by diethyl sulfate in postmeiotic male germ cells of
Drosophila.

The role of a defect for nucleotide excision repair (NER) in oocytes on
the repair of DNA ethyl adducts induced by diethyl sulfate (DES) in male
germ cells of Drosophila was analysed. Frequencies of mutations at
multiple loci (recessive lethal mutations) and at the vermilion gene
induced in NER+ conditions (cross NER+ x NER+) were compared with those
fixed in a NER- background (NER- x NER+). The M(NER-)/M(NER+) mutability
ratios for two DES concentrations, 10 mM and 15 mM, were 2.21 and 1.49,
respectively, indicating that NER repairs part of the DES-induced damage.
The majority of 28 fertile vermilion mutations produced by DES in NER- are
transitions, both GC-AT (46.4%) and AT-GC (21.4%) transitions are found,
the consequences of O6-ethylguanine and O4-ethylthymine, respectively.
Transversions (21.5%), one +1 frameshift mutation (3.6%) and two deletions
(7.1%) are most likely the result of N-alkylation damage. Furthermore, the
DES-induced mutation spectra show interesting differences in relation to
the exposure dose. All 10 mutants isolated in this and a previous [L.M.
Sierra, A. Pastink, M.J.M. Nivard, E.W. Vogel, DNA base sequence changes
induced by DES in postmeiotic male germ cells of Drosophila melanogaster,
Mol. Gen. Genet. 237 (1993) 370-374] study from experiments with low
DES-effectiveness are exclusively transitions, independent whether the
females were of the NER+ or NER-genotype. This indicates that at lower DES
effectiveness only O-alkylation damage is relevant, and that N-alkylation
damage is repaired. In experiments revealing high DES-effectiveness,
vermilion mutations representing N-alkylation damage reached 43% (9/21)
with NER- and 26% (7/27) with NER+ females, suggesting (i) that NER
becomes involved at high adduct levels because then the base excision
repair (BER) may be saturated, and (ii) that this involvement of NER
causes the relative decrease from 43% to 26% N-alkylation mediated
sequence changes.
