Numerous mouse models of polycystic kidney disease (PKD) have been
described in which the mutant phenotypes closely resemble human PKD with
regard to morphology, cyst localization, and disease progression. As in
human PKD, genetic background affects the disease phenotype in mouse PKD
models. Using experimental crosses, these modifying effects can be
dissected into discrete genetic factors referred to as quantitative trait
loci. The locus for the mouse bpk model was recently mapped to chromosome
(Chr) 10. In the course of these studies, marked variability was observed
in the renal cystic disease expressed in F2 bpk/bpk homozygotes of a
(BALB/c-+/bpk x CAST/Ei)F1 intercross. The current study was undertaken to
further characterize the renal cystic disease as quantitative trait in
this F2 cohort and to map the genetic modifiers that modulate this
phenotype. Whole-genome scans revealed a CAST-derived locus on distal Chr
6, near D6Mit14, that affects renal cystic disease severity. Additional
analyses identified loci on Chr 1, Chr 2, and Chr 4, as well as a possible
interaction between the Chr 6 locus and a locus on distal Chr 1, near
D1Mit17. Interestingly, the gene encoding RGS7, a regulator of G protein
signaling that binds to polycystin-1, was mapped to the same Chr 1
interval. It is concluded that the severity of the bpk renal cystic
disease phenotype is modulated by multiple loci and possibly by epistatic
interaction among them. It is hypothesized that the gene encoding the
polycystin-binding partner RGS7 is a candidate for the Chr 1 genetic
modifier.