Yeast mutants temperature-sensitive for growth after random mutagenesis of the
chromosomal RAS2 gene and deletion of the RAS1 gene.

Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains with a disrupted RAS1 gene and with an
intact RAS2 gene (ras1- RAS2 strains) grew well on both fermentable and
nonfermentable carbon sources. By constructing isogenic mutants having a
disrupted RAS1 locus and a randomly mutagenized chromosomal RAS2 gene, we
obtained yeast strains with specific growth defects. The strain TS1 was
unable to grow on nonfermentable carbon sources and galactose at 37
degrees C, while it could grow on glucose at the same temperature. The
mutated RAS2 gene in TS1 cells encoded a protein with the glycines at
positions 82 and 84 replaced by serine and arginine respectively. Both
mutations were necessary for temperature sensitivity. We also isolated a
mutant yeast that was unable to grow on nonfermentable carbon sources both
at 30 and 37 degrees C, while growing on glucose at both temperatures.
This phenotype was caused by a single chromosomal mutation, leading to the
replacement of aspartic acid 40 of the RAS2 protein by asparagine. A ras1-
yeast strain with a chromosomal RAS2 gene harbouring the three mutations
together did not grow at any temperature using non-fermentable carbon
sources, but it was able to grow on glucose at 30 degrees C, and not at 37
degrees C. The mutated proteins were much less effective than the
wild-type RAS2 protein in the stimulation of adenylate cyclase, but were
efficiently expressed in vivo. The possible roles of residues 40, 82 and
84 of the RAS2 protein in the regulation of adenylate cyclase are
discussed.
