Yeast contain two nontandemly repeated enolase structural genes which have
been isolated on bacterial plasmids designated peno46 and peno8 (Holland,
M. J., Holland, J. P., Thill, G. P., and Jackson, K. A. (1981) J. Biol.
Chem. 256, 1385-1395). In order to study the expression of the enolase
genes in vivo, the resident enolase gene in a wild type yeast strain
corresponding to the gene isolated on peno46 was replaced with a deletion,
constructed in vitro, which lacks 90% of the enolase coding sequences.
Three catalytically active enolases are resolved differ DEAE-Sephadex
chromatography of wild type cellular extracts. As expected, a single form
of enolase was resolved from extracts of the mutant cell. Immunological
and electrophoretic analyses of the multiple forms of enolase confirm that
two enolase genes are expressed in wild type cells and that isozymes are
formed in the cell by random assortment of the two polypeptides into three
active enolase dimers. The yeast enolase loci have been designated ENO1
and ENO2. The deletion mutant lacks the enolase 1 polypeptide confirming
that this polypeptide is encoded by the gene isolated on peno46. The
intracellular steady state concentrations of the two polypeptides are
dependent on the carbon source used to propagate the cells. Log phase
cells grown on glucose contain 20-fold more enolase 2 polypeptide than
enolase 1 polypeptide, whereas cells grown on ethanol or glycerol plus
lactate contain similar amounts of the two polypeptides. The 20-fold
higher than in cells grown on the nonfermentable carbon sources. In vitro
translation of total cellular RNA suggests that the steady state
concentrations of the two enolase mRNAs in cells grown on different carbon
sources are proportional to the steady state concentrations of the
respective enolase polypeptides.