Schizosaccharomyces pombe regulates intracellular cAMP levels, and thus
cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) activity, in response to changes in
nutrient conditions. Mutations in any of eight git genes inhibit glucose
repression of fbp1 transcription, alter the cell morphology, and cause a
reduction in the growth rate. The eight git genes encode components of an
adenylate cyclase activation pathway, adenylate cyclase itself, and the
catalytic subunit of PKA. Three of these genes have been identified in
other studies as regulators of meiosis. Here we show that the sck1 gene,
cloned as a high copy number suppressor of a mutation in git3, is able to
suppress the defects conferred by a mutation in any of these git genes.
Sequence analysis suggests that sck1 encodes a protein most closely
related to the Saccharomyces cerevisiae SCH9 protein kinase that had
previously been identified as a high copy number suppressor of mutations
in S. cerevisiae that reduce or eliminate PKA activity. Disruption of the
sck1 gene causes a significant delay in exit from stationary phase when
combined with a disruption of the pka1 (git6) gene encoding the catalytic
subunit of PKA. However, the sck1 disruption by itself has little or no
effect upon fbp1 transcription, meiosis, or exit from stationary phase,
and does not enhance the constitutive fbp1 transcription observed in a
pka1 mutant. Therefore, sck1 appears to function in a redundant fashion to
pka1, but to varying degrees, in the pathways regulated by pka1.