The adult ovaries and testes contain several specialized somatic cell
types that support the differentiation of germ cells into mature gametes.
Each of these cell types arise from mesodermal cells that constitute the
embryonic gonad. To explore the mechanisms governing the development and
differentiation of these cells, we focus on the formation of the gonad
during Drosophila development. Using markers for the precursors of the
somatic cells of the gonad, we identify discrete steps in the development
of the gonad. Our results suggest the existence of different populations
of gonadal precursors at early stages in gonadogenesis that represent
precursors of cell types found within the adult gonad. The functions of
the homeotic genes abdominal A and Abdominal B are required for the
development of gonadal precursors, however, here we provide evidence that
each plays a distinct role. abd A activity alone specifies anterior
gonadal precursor fates, whereas abd A and Abd B act together to specify a
posterior subpopulation of gonadal precursors. Once specified, gonadal
precursors born within posterior parasegments must move to the site of
gonad formation. Here, we show that the proper regional identities, as
established by homeotic gene function, are required for the arrest of
migration at the correct position. Finally, our analysis of late stages of
gonadogenesis suggests that abd A is required in a population of cells
within parasegments 10 and 11 that partially ensheath the coalescing
gonad. Mutations in iab-4 abolish expression of abd A within these cells,
and as a result block the coalescence of the gonad.