F3 is a 135 kDa neuronal cell surface adhesive glycoprotein belonging to
the immunoglobulin supergene family (IgSF) which mediates heterophilic
contact formation among neural cells and is involved in the control of
neurite growth. F3 expression is regulated, during critical developmental
periods, on neuronal subpopulations thus suggesting that control of F3
gene expression could be of morphogenetic relevance. To shed light on the
mechanism involved in the control of F3 gene expression we isolated clones
covering about 50 kilobases of the F3 gene which also included the
promoter region. The study of F3 gene exon/intron organization revealed
that, like other neural IgSF molecules, each of the first two F3 C2
domains is encoded by two exons while the N-terminus, the signal peptide
and the 5' untranslated region are each encoded by distinct exons. A
single transcription start site was identified, surrounded by a short 114
bp sequence able to direct reporter gene expression in both F3-expressing
and -non-expressing cells. In addition, a cell type-specific enhancer,
only active in F3-expressing cells, was found immediately upstream to it.
Structural analysis of the promoter region revealed consensus sequences
for binding transcription factors involved in cell type-specific and/or
developmental regulations. Most of them are homeobox containing
transcription factors thus suggesting that regulation of F3 gene
expression could be part of a large developmental program.