In Drosophila, the dorsoventral asymmetry of the egg chamber depends on a
dorsalizing signal that emanates from the oocyte. This signal is supplied
by the TGF alpha-like gurken protein whose RNA is localized to the
dorsal-anterior corner of the oocyte, gurken protein is the potential
ligand of the Drosophila EGF receptor homolog (torpedo), which is
expressed in the follicular epithelium surrounding the oocyte. Here, we
describe how changes in the dorsalizing germ-line signal affect the
embryonic dorsoventral pattern. A reduction in strength of the germ-line
signal as produced by mutations in gurken or torpedo does not change the
slope of the embryonic dorsoventral morphogen gradient, but causes a
splitting of the gradient ventrally. This leads to embryos with two
partial dorsoventral axes. A change in distribution of the germ-line
signal as caused by fs(1)K10, squid and orb mutations leads to a shift in
the orientation of the embryonic dorsoventral axis relative to the
anterior-posterior axis. In extreme cases, this results in embryos with a
dorsoventral axis almost parallel to the anterior-posterior axis. These
results imply that gurken, unlike other localized cytoplasmic
determinants, is not directly responsible for the establishment of cell
fates along a body axis, but that it restricts and orients an active
axis-forming process which occurs later in the follicular epithelium or in
the early embryo.