The Leu3 protein (Leu3p) of Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a pleiotropic
transregulator that can function both as an activator and as a repressor
of transcription. It binds to upstream promoter elements (UASLEU) with the
consensus sequence 5'-GCCGGNNCCGGC-3'. The DNA-binding motif of Leu3p
belongs to the family of Zn(II)2-Cys6 clusters. The motif is located
between amino acid residues 37 and 67 of the 886-residue protein. In this
study, we used a recombinant peptide consisting of residues 17 to 147 to
explore the interaction between Leu3p and its cognate DNA. We found that
the Leu3p(17-147) peptide is a monomer in the absence of UASLEU but
assumes a dimeric structure when the DNA is present. Results of
protein-DNA cross-linking and methylation and ethylation interference
footprinting experiments show that the Leu3p(17-147) dimer interacts
symmetrically with two contact triplets separated by 6 bp and suggest that
the peptide approaches its target DNA in such a way that each subunit is
positioned closer to one DNA strand than to the other. The binding of
Leu3p is strongly affected by the spacing between the contact triplets of
the UASLEU and by the type of triplet. Binding occurs when the triplets
are 6 bp apart (normal spacing) but fails to occur when the triplets are
0, 5, or 8 bp apart. Weak binding occurs when the triplets are 7 bp apart.
Binding does not occur when the UASLEU triplets (GCC....GGC) are replaced
with triplets found in the UAS elements for Gal4p, Put3p, and Ppr1p
(CGG....CCG). The apparent Kd for the normal Leu3p(17-147)-UASLEU complex
is about 3 nM. A mutant form of Leu3p(17-147) in which the histidine at
position 50 has been replaced with cysteine binds UASLEU with
significantly greater affinity (apparent Kd of about 0.7 nM), even though
the interaction between the mutant peptide and target DNA appears to be
unchanged. Interestingly, repression of basal-level transcription, which
is a hallmark property of the wild-type Leu3p(17-147) peptide, is largely
lost with the mutant peptide, indicating that there is no direct
correlation between strength of binding and repression.