The Saccharomyces cerevisiae Cdc42 protein, a member of the Ras
superfamily of low-molecular-weight GTP-binding proteins, is involved in
the control of cell polarity during the yeast cell cycle. This protein has
a consensus sequence (CAAX) for geranylgeranyl modification and is likely
to be associated, at least in part, with cell membranes. Using cell
fractionation and immunolocalization techniques, we have investigated the
subcellular localization of Cdc42p. Cdc42p was found in both soluble and
particulate pools, and neither its abundance nor its distribution varied
through the cell cycle. The particulate form of Cdc42p could be
solubilized with detergents but not with NaCl or urea, suggesting that it
is tightly associated with membranes. An increase in soluble Cdc42p was
observed in a geranylgeranyltransferase mutant strain (cdc43-2ts) grown at
the restrictive temperature. In addition, Cdc42p from a cdc42C188S mutant
strain (that has an alteration at the prenylation consensus site) was
almost exclusively in the soluble fraction, suggesting that membrane
localization is dependent on geranylgeranyl modification at Cys-188.
Immunofluorescence and immunoelectron microscopy experiments demonstrated
that Cdc42p localizes to the plasma membrane in the vicinity of secretory
vesicles that were found at the site of bud emergence, at the tips and
sides of enlarging buds, and within mating projections (shmoo tips) in
alpha-factor-arrested cells. These results indicate that Cdc42p is
localized to the bud site early in the cell cycle and suggest that this
localization is critical for the selection of the proper site for bud
emergence and for polarized cell growth.