To further elucidate the functions of actin in budding yeast and to relate
actin structure to specific roles and interactions in vivo, we determined
the phenotypes caused by 13 charged-to-alanine mutations isolated
previously in the single Saccharomyces cerevisiae actin gene. Defects in
actin organization, morphogenesis, budding pattern, chitin deposition,
septation, nuclear segregation, and mitochondrial organization were
observed. In wild-type cells, mitochondria were found to be aligned along
actin cables. Many of the amino acid substitutions that had the most
severe effects on mitochondrial organization are located under the myosin
"footprint" on the actin monomer, suggesting that actin-myosin
interactions might underlie mitochondrial organization in yeast. In
addition, one mutant (act1-129; R177A, D179A) produced an actin that
assembled into cables and patches that could be visualized by anti-actin
immunofluorescence in situ and that assembled into microfilaments of
normal appearance in vitro as judged by electron microscopy but which
could not be labeled by rhodamine-phalloidin in situ or in vitro.
Rhodamine-phalloidin could label actin filaments assembled from all of the
other mutant actins, including one (act1-119; R116A, E117A, K118A) that is
altered at a residue (E117) that can be chemically cross-linked to
phalloidin. The implication of residues R177 and/or D179 in phalloidin
binding is in close agreement with a recently reported molecular model in
which the phalloidin-binding site is proposed to be at the junction of two
or three actin monomers in the filament.