Centromere binding factor 1 (Cbf1p or CP1) binds to the CDEI region of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae centromeres and is a member of the basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) class of proteins. Deletion of the gene encoding
Cbf1p results in an increased frequency of chromosome loss,
hypersensitivity to low levels of microtubule disrupting drugs (such as
thiabendazole and benomyl) and methionine auxotrophy. By polymerase chain
reaction-based random mutagenesis of the CBF1 gene we have obtained a
number of mutant alleles that make full-length protein with impaired
function. The mutations in these alleles are clustered in or just
downstream from the bHLH domain. Among the alleles obtained was a class
that was more compromised for transcriptional activation and a class that
was more compromised for chromosome loss and thiabendazole
hypersensitivity. These results indicate that at least some aspects of the
role of Cbf1p in chromosome segregation and transcriptional activation are
distinct. In contrast, increased chromosome loss and thiabendazole
hypersensitivity were not separated in any of the alleles, suggesting that
these phenotypes reflect the same mechanistic defect. These observations
are consistent with a model that suggests that one role of Cbf1p in
chromosome segregation may be to improve the efficiency with which contact
between the kinetochore and spindle microtubules is established or
maintained.