BACKGROUND: The mammalian transcription factor RBP-J kappa binds to the
DNA sequence motif CGTGGGAA and is involved in the regulation of gene
expression; for example, it plays a part in the transactivation of viral
and cellular genes by Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen-2. The Drosophila
homologue of RBP-J kappa is the product of the Suppressor of Hairless
(Su(H)) gene. Su(H) is a neurogenic gene that acts downstream of Notch,
which encodes a cell-surface receptor. Furthermore, in the mouse, the
phenotypes of homozygous mutant Notch1 embryos are very similar to those
of homozygous mutant RBP-J kappa embryos. Recent studies, using the yeast
two-hybrid system, have led to the suggestion that the CDC10/ankyrin-like
repeats of the Drosophila Notch protein interact with the Su(H) protein.
RESULTS: We searched for proteins that interact with mouse RBP-J kappa
using the yeast two-hybrid system, and in this way identified a short
intracellular region (mRAM23) of the mouse Notch1 protein that lacks any
known sequence motif. In vitro interaction studies, using proteins fused
to glutathione-S-transferase, showed that RBP-J kappa and Su(H) bind
directly to the RAM23 regions of mouse Notch1 and Drosophila Notch,
respectively. Immunoprecipitation analysis showed that RBP-J kappa and the
mRAM23 region of mouse Notch1 also interact in vivo. Further studies,
including site-directed mutagenesis experiments, narrowed down the region
of mouse Notch1 that interacts with RBP-J kappa. The results indicate that
this region is less than 50 amino-acid residues in length, and lies
immediately downstream of the transmembrane region. CONCLUSIONS: We show
that the transcription factor RBP-J kappa/Su(H) interacts directly with a
novel intracellular domain of the cell-surface receptor Notch. RBP-J
kappa/Su(H) does not appear to interact with Notch via the CDC10/ankyrin
repeats implicated in previous studies.