The detection of inactivating mutations in tumor suppressor genes is
critical to their characterization, as well as to the development of
diagnostic testing. Most approaches for mutational screening of germ-line
specimens are complicated by the fact that mutations are heterozygous and
that missense mutations are difficult to interpret in the absence of
information about protein function. We describe a novel method using
Saccharomyces cerevisiae for detecting protein-truncating mutations in any
gene of interest. The PCR-amplified coding sequence is inserted by
homologous recombination into a yeast URA3 fusion protein, and
transformants are assayed for growth in the absence of uracil. The high
efficiency of homologous recombination in yeast ensures that both alleles
are represented among transformants and achieves separation of alleles,
which facilitates subsequent nucleotide sequencing of the mutated
transcript. The specificity of translational initiation of the URA3 gene
leads to minimal enzymatic activity in transformants harboring an inserted
stop codon, and hence to reliable distinction between specimens with
wild-type alleles and those with a heterozygous truncating mutation. This
yeast-based stop codon assay accurately detects heterozygous truncating
mutations in the BRCA1 gene in patients with early onset of breast cancer
and in the APC gene in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis. This
approach offers a rapid and reliable method for genetic diagnosis in
individuals at high risk for germ-line mutations in cancer susceptibility
genes.