During a screen for respiration competent yeast mutants that were unable
to grow with acetate as a carbon source, two idh2 cit1 double mutants were
identified. These strains were defective in the catalytic subunit of the
NAD(+)-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase and citrate synthase of the
tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle. The strains harboring the idh2 alleles
from these strains had two unusual phenotypes. First, their growth on many
nonfermentable carbon sources was much poorer than strains containing
other idh2 mutations. Second, the poor growth phenotype could be
suppressed by the presence of mutations in CIT1 and other genes encoding
oxidative functions. Spontaneous suppressor mutants that restore fast
growth on glycerol medium to strains harboring two idh2 alleles were
isolated, and a large percentage of the suppressor mutations have been
identified within the CIT1 gene and at several other loci. Elevated levels
of several TCA cycle proteins were observed in these idh2 mutants that
were not observed in the presence of suppressing cit1 mutations. Citrate
and isocitrate concentrations were also elevated in the idh2 mutants, but
probably not to toxic levels. Five idh2 alleles were sequenced to
understand the defects of the two classes of mutations. Sequence analysis
indicated that the poor growth phenotype was caused by the loss of Idh2p
protein. Similarly, eight cit1 alleles were sequenced to understand their
characteristics as glycerol suppressors of idh2. These and other studies
indicate that any mutation within CIT1 was capable of suppressing the idh2
mutations. Several models to explain these interactions are discussed.