Parallel molecular genetic pathways operate during CNS metamorphosis in
Drosophila.

Insect metamorphosis provides a valuable model for studying mechanisms of
steroid hormone action on the nervous system during a dynamic phase of
functional remodeling. The Drosophila Broad Complex (BRC) holds a pivotal
position in the gene expression cascade triggered by the molting hormone
20-hydroxyecdysone (20E) at the onset of metamorphosis. We previously
demonstrated that the BRC, which encodes a family of zinc-finger
transcription factors, is essential for transducing 20E signals into the
morphogenetic movements and cellular assembly that alter the CNS from
juvenile to adult form and function. We set out to examine the
relationship of BRC to two other genes, IMP-E1 and Deformed (Dfd),
involved in the metamorphic transition of the CNS. Representatives of the
whole family of BRC transcript isoforms accumulate in the CNS during the
larval-to-pupal transition and respond directly to 20E in vitro. IMP-E1 is
also directly regulated by 20E, but its induction is independent of BRC,
revealing that 20E works through at least two pathways in the CNS. DFD
expression is also independent of BRC function. Surprisingly, BRC and DFD
proteins are expressed in distinct, nonoverlapping subsets of neuronal
nuclei of the subesophageal ganglion even though both are required for its
migration into the head capsule. This suggests that the segment identity
and ecdysone cascades operate in parallel to control region-specific
reorganization during metamorphosis.
