Tottering mice inherit a recessive mutation of the calcium channel alpha1A
subunit that causes ataxia, polyspike discharges, and intermittent
dystonic episodes. The calcium channel alpha1A subunit gene encodes the
pore-forming protein of P/Q-type voltage-dependent calcium channels and is
predominantly expressed in cerebellar granule and Purkinje neurons with
moderate expression in hippocampus and inferior colliculus. Because
calcium misregulation likely underlies the tottering mouse phenotype,
calcium channel blockers were tested for their ability to block the motor
episodes. Pharmacologic agents that specifically block L-type
voltage-dependent calcium channels, but not P/Q-type calcium channels,
prevented the inducible dystonia of tottering mutant mice. Specifically,
the dihydropyridines nimodipine, nifedipine, and nitrendipine, the
benzothiazepine diltiazem, and the phenylalkylamine verapamil all
prevented restraint-induced tottering mouse motor episodes. Conversely,
the L-type calcium channel agonist Bay K8644 induced stereotypic tottering
mouse dystonic at concentrations significantly below those required to
induce seizures in control mice. In situ hybridization demonstrated that
L-type calcium channel alpha1C subunit mRNA expression was up-regulated in
the Purkinje cells of tottering mice. Radioligand binding with
[3H]nitrendipine also revealed a significant increase in the density of
L-type calcium channels in tottering mouse cerebellum. These data suggest
that although a P/Q-type calcium channel mutation is the primary defect in
tottering mice, L-type calcium channels may contribute to the generation
of the intermittent dystonia observed in these mice. The susceptibility of
L-type calcium channels to voltage-dependent facilitation may promote this
abnormal motor phenotype.